Prologue

The question of his age and the Luftwaffe controversy is an old chestnut. Here’s my take. Sajer is usually said to have been born 13 January 1927, which would’ve made him 15½ years old when he volunteered for Wehrmacht service. Clearly improbable. Even the alternative year of birth, 1926, would have made him too young. In an interview, he said that he was 16 years old when Germany invaded France, which would make him 18½ years old in the summer of 1942, and thus able to volunteer, as well as having served a stint in the RAD. My theory is that he made himself younger in the book in order to be able to explain his enlistment as a mistake made by a boy.

The Swedish translation doesn’t mention Hans-Ulrich Rudel; does anyone know what the original (French) text says? As no Stuka unit or flight school was stationed in Chemnitz, it seems like it is a case of wishful thinking. Sajer might have applied for service in the Luftwaffe, an option open to volunteers, but as he wasn’t approved, he might have ended up in the Kraftfahr-Ausbildungs-Abteilung 4 d. Luftwaffe in Chemnitz, which might also explain why he was picked for similar training in the army.

The ghetto in Warsaw is referred to as if it wasn’t around anymore; in fact, there were still seven months left until the uprising that eventually led to the destruction of it.

There’s no castle corresponding to the description within 10 miles/15 km of Bialystok, but there’s a castle of unknown size in Knyszyn, 28 km from the city. ”Kremenstovsk” isn’t a Polish name; there’s a village named Krzeczkowo within reasonable range from Knyszyn.


Chapter 1

There’s mention of Sajer’s uncle, serving in the besieged 6th Army in Stalingrad. According to German records, an Anton Sajer is listed as missing in Stalingrad since 1 January 1943.

Sajer’s description of the transport to Stalingrad doesn’t ring true. Why should a transport column in Army Group Center try to reach units in Army Group South? Then there’s the whole thing with the “19th Kompanie Rollbahn” and all that, like the “Panzerdivision Stülpnagel”…


Chapter 2

The weapons problem. This chapter mentions artillery like ”77s” and ”107s”, as well as “Alpenberg” light tanks. This shouldn’t be taken as evidence that Sajer’s making things up. I’ve seen reliable memoirs with dodgy facts, like Günther Koschorrek’s “Blood Red Snow”, where Soviet soldiers wield “Kalashnikovs”. For a soldier with a marked disinterest in military hardware like Sajer, such mistakes can be understandable.

The transport problem. Again, the description doesn’t ring true. Why should a transport company trudge through the snow for more than two weeks just to supply a single frontline platoon? Wouldn’t it be more logical to have a supply route that was shorter (like 2-4 days travel at most in wintertime), delivering the supplies to the regimental or battalion quartermaster? Even taking into account that Sajer might have known next to nothing of the SOP, the description leaves the attentive reader puzzled.

The unit problem. The transport arrives to the ”Ninth Infantry Regiment”. There was no such regiment; there was a 9th Grenadier Regiment outside Leningrad by that time. There’s also a reference to the “comrades in the 107th”; that might be the 107th Grenadier Regiment, which was south-east of Moscow.

The Don Front problem. At the beginning of the chapter, Sajer says that the time was around the end of February or beginning of March, 1943. The aforementioned transport takes almost three weeks. This plays havoc with the chronology in chapters 2 and 3. While events unfold more or less in the correct historical order, it is 3-4 weeks too late if the reader extrapolates the dates. Then, on page 133 in chapter 3, Sajer mentions that they had become part of the Third Battle of Kharkov, and the chronology snaps back in place.


Chapter 3

A German Army car called a "Steiner” appears. It has been suggested that Sajer meant a Steyr.

There are no records of a “Ernst Neubach” (or with a similar name) being killed, but Sajer probably changed the name out of respect for “Ernst’s” family.

Sajer encounters Francophone members of “the Walloon Division”. The only Walloon unit by this time was the Wallonisches-Infanterie Bataillon 373, which as far as I know wasn’t even at the front then.

Sajer and friends are saved by units from the 25th Panzer Division, commanded by Guderian. The division was stationed in Norway, and Guderian was Inspector-General of the Armoured Troops.

During the battle, Sajer sees Tiger tanks, as well as Panthers. The Panther made its debut at Kursk, several months later.


Chapter 4

”Henceforth, my identification would be Gefreiter Sajer, G. 100/1010 G4. Siebzehntes Bataillon, Leichtinfanterie Groβdeutschland Division, Süd, G.”
The problems with that paragraph have been amply discussed. Could ”100/1010 G4.” be a garbled Wehrnummer? ”Siebzehntes Bataillon” hasn’t been satisfactorily explained; could it be another name for the Feldersatz-Bataillon? And what does that “G” at the end stand for?

No Soviet “extermination camp” named Tomvos is known; could it be an urban myth that flourished among German soldiers?

Much has been made of the ”Groβdeutschland” cuff title, but it could be a simple mistake. The chapter contains more glaring inaccuracies which I haven’t seen mentioned before.

The problem with the bomb raids. Sajer experiences no less than three bomb raids during his leave. Strangely enough, I’ve found no mention of any raids on Magdeburg or Berlin during April 1943. The last raid he mentions numbers 1100 American and British bombers in a day raid. Notwithstanding that the Brits bombed during the nights, the total number of USAAF and RAF bombers was 972 at the beginning of March, 1943. That last raid claimed 22,000 lives according to Sajer, which can be compared with the 4000 killed during the entire “Battle of Berlin”, which took place between November 1943 and March 1944.

Checking authentic maps from the 1920-40 period, I haven’t found neither “Killeringstrasse” nor the “Oder bruke” [sic].

Sajer bemoans that he had nothing to eat. The SOP for soldiers on leave was that they got a ration card that was for the duration of the leave.

The Tempelhof airfield wasn’t used for military aircraft during the war (except for emergencies), so no Focke-Wulf 190’s could’ve been based there, much less any “Focke-Wulf 195”.

Before the end of his leave, Sajer and Paula watch the movie ”Immen See”. That should be “Immensee”, a movie that premiered in Berlin on 17 December, 1943, about eight months later.

Chapter 5

The training for service in ”Groβdeutschland” (GD) is said to have started in the beginning of July. Considering that Operation Zitadelle started on July 5, this messes up the chronology (again). It can hardly be due to a translation error, as June is “Juin” in French, while July is “Juillet”.

The soldiers are instructed in the use of the Panzerfaust, which makes it an anachronism. The ”Faustpatrone klein”, as the weapon was known as by that time, was still in development; 3000 units were ordered in July 1943 for field trials, and the weapon wasn’t issued to field units until September that year.

Sajer compounds the problems with the chronology further when he writes “toward the middle of July, only a few days before the battle of Belgorod” (page 207). By the middle of July, GD had been in combat for almost two weeks (Operation Zitadelle), and had been relieved on the 18th. Belgorod was firmly in German hands until 5 August, when the Soviets took the city. By then, GD was entrained and not involved in the defense of the city.


Chapter 6

This chapter, which is a tour-de-force, describes the intensity of combat, and is worth reading for the raw feelings caused by modern warfare alone. Still, there are several problems with the chapter. Sajer’s by now well-documented muddling of dates and places is played out in full, and the inclusion of the young Waffen-SS troops is hard to explain.

“The Battle of Belgorod” problem. As noted above, Belgorod was firmly in German hands until 5 August, and thus not the object for any battle in the middle of July. On page 217, just before the start of the battle, an NCO says that they are about three miles north-west of Belgorod. That would place GD in the area of the III Panzerkorps, not the XXXXVIII Panzerkorps, to which GD belonged. Belgorod (which wasn’t in Soviet hands) is said to have been taken by the end of the second day of battle, which by Sajer’s account would be on a day when GD wasn’t even in the frontline. In the real Operation Zitadelle, the village Cherkasskoye was taken by the Germans on the second day. I can understand the confusion, as an ordinary rifleman didn’t have a horizon that stretched much further than a couple of hundred meters from his foxhole. I’ve read a US veteran’s account, where he didn’t even know which country he was in around the time of the Battle of the Bulge.

Sajer’s claim that “the Battle of Belgorod” took place in the middle of July is, as evidenced by the history of the GD Division, patently off. Considering that soldiers were forbidden to keep diaries, such a lapse is understandable.

The “Young lions” problem. Sajer describes how 18,000 young replacements from the Hitlerjugend arrives to the front from the “Silesian camps”. Please note that this shouldn’t be confused with the 12. SS-Panzerdivision ”Hitlerjugend”, which was formed in July 1943 and trained in Belgium. There are indications that large amounts of volunteers came from the Hitlerjugend youth movement during the rebuilding phase in the spring of 1942, and it is possible that similar reinforcements arrived in 1943. 18,000 men are enough for one full division, so Sajer exaggerates the number. GD’s training depot was situated in Cottbus, Brandenburg, and not Silesia.

Sajer gives us (finally) an identifiable unit to which he is posted. As he calls his fellow soldiers “grenadiers”, it can be surmised that he was in the Grenadier-Regiment Großdeutschland 1, (the other infantry regiment was the Füsilier-Regiment Großdeutschland 2). The 5th company was the 1st battalion’s heavy weapons company, equipped with light field guns, AT guns and heavy machineguns (in the pioneer platoon). The commander of the 5th company, Lieutenant Hans Joachim Schafmeister-Berckholtz, recalls a Sajer serving in that company.

So, allowing for faulty recollections of dates, places and numbers, it is fully possible that Guy Sajer fought in Operation Zitadelle.

Chapters 7

This chapter is confused and confusing. It is very hard to set dates for the events, but it seems like the chapter covers most of September. Dnieper is crossed and re-crossed, and it is hard to determine whether GD’s alleged involvement in the Battle of Konotop takes place at the beginning, middle, or end of the month. Going by the historical record, Konotop was taken by the Soviet 60th Army on 6 September. The problem is that there’s no evidence that GD units were present, as the bulk of the Division appears to have been involved in fighting c. 150 km to the south. Konotop was defended by the 183. Infanterie-Division, and according to the divisional history, no units from GD were assisting in the battle. Adding to the confusion are Sajer’s claims that it was snowing (p. 271), but also that GD stayed on the east bank of the Dnieper until the first snow. Historically, the first snow came on 5 December, two months after GD had crossed the river. Then he seems to forget about the snow for a few chapters, referring instead to dust, rains and mud. There’s no mention of GD’s rearguard action at the bridge at Kremenchug.

On page 271, Sajer is up front about the problem with dates and places. “One can only draw a very general view of our situation from the lines I’ve just written, without any of the details. (…) I have never had more than a very approximate idea of our movements and centers of operation, and would certainly be incapable of drawing an accurate diagram of the front at any point of the war.” How true! A benign attitude towards his muddled chronology and geography would be to regard the inconsistencies as a mark of authenticity. A fraudster would do better research, but write with less presence, and would certainly continue to churn out war novels like e.g. Sven Hassel. But it is a bit damning that two major engagements (Belgorod and Konotop) in his book never took place, at least not at the places going by those names.


Chapter 8

On page 304, the soldiers are told that the whole division (GD) is surrounded in a pocket centered on Konotop. This is patently false.


Chapter 9

Sajer crosses the Dnieper just south of Kiev, about the same time (historically) as the bulk of the Division crosses the river at Kremenchug, 250 km to the south.

Chapter 10

This chapter takes place sometime in October, as Sajer mentions that it is almost three months to his 18th birthday. While on his soon-to-be-terminated leave, he meets a veteran soldier who tells him that he was a prisoner of war in Holland for a couple of years after WW1. Holland/the Netherlands was neutral during WW1…


Chapter 11

Sajer is told that GD is stationed near Vinnitsa, but that his company is some 150 km further away. In real life, GD was fighting east of Krivoi Rog, over 400 km from Vinnitsa.
Sajer learns that new tanks are coated with an antimagnetic paste; this is correct, as Zimmerit was applied on tanks beginning earlier in the autumn of 1943. He also learns that the Russians have copied the Panzerfaust; this isn’t correct.


Chapter 12

On page 386, Sajer notes a German halftrack with an “anti-tank machine gun”. Perhaps it is a 20 mm autocannon for AA use, deployed against ground targets. The Soviet tank engaged by it isn’t impressed…


Chapter 13

The winter of 1943-44 was milder than previous winters, so the temperatures quoted might be exaggerated. The town of Boporievska (or something similar-sounding) cannot be found among Ukrainian towns and cities larger than 2,500 inhabitants (present). 

Three IS-2 Stalin tanks drop by around the New Year, offering a rare glimpse of a tank that didn’t make its battlefield debut until later in the spring of 1944… They are fired upon by PaK 36 37 mm AT guns, a weapon deemed obsolete and no found in the GD TOE; PaK 38 50 mm AT guns were fielded by GD instead.

There’s no mention of the transfer of GD to Kirovograd.

Page 418: ”The front on the Rumanian border had held.” This was, according to Sajer, the result of the battles in January 1944. Funny, as historically the fighting was some 200 km to the east. Soviet troops didn’t reach the Rumanian border until April.


Chapter 14

Sajer is spending a couple of months (January – March) in a camp south of Lvov (then in Poland). The camp is situated near the village Sueka. There’s a village named Sivka-Voynilov by the Dniester, which is 80 km south-east of Lvov. No mention of GD’s battles at Kirovograd and Rovnoye. He also refers to “the carnage at Vinnitsa”. The city was taken by the Russians on 20 March, so for once Sajer’s chronology is in agreement with history. Also, his mention of the new uniforms (M44’s) is correct; while it wasn’t introduced until September that year, GD was one of several divisions which had received it for field tests. Many replacements wore it. The new quality of the cloth is also correct, as the uniforms were made out of a wool/cellulose blend. The mention of “Brandenburg disciplinary battalions” is false, though – the Brandenburg units were highly trained commandos (later in the war more like regular field units).


Chapter 15

The whole Bessarabian/Rumanian chapter is highly dubious. Sajer claims that some GD units were spread over Bessarabia (the region between Rumania and Ukraine), while the bulk of the division was fighting north of Lvov and in the north-eastern part of Byelorussia. Sajer’s own company and two other companies were involved in anti-partisan warfare in Bessarabia. This chapter takes place in April and May, Sajer even mentions that a band of partisans had been located by the end of May. It might be of interest that historically, the bulk of the division was engaged in combat in northern Bessarabia (about 700 km from NE Byelorussia) during April and May, and after that the fighting around Târgul Frumos by the end of April and the larger part of May (the main Battle of Târgul Frumos took place on 2-7 May). Sajer doesn’t say which battalion he belongs to, but if he still was in the 1. Battalion of the PzGr-Reg GD, then it was present at the Battle of Târgul Frumos. 15 june, GD (minus parts of the PzReg GD PzFüs-Reg GD) was transferred to an area 100 km south of Jassy (Iasi), where it remained for R&R until 24 July. Meanwhile, Sajer’s rump battalion appears to have been cut loose, left on its own in anti-partisan warfare, and after Captain Weisreidau’s death it disintegrates. They are even ordered to march north (p. 453), which doesn’t make sense, as their own lines were to the west. Some pages later they are nearing the Rumanian border, so they must’ve turned left somewhere along the way. Sajer’s group is part of a column of stragglers, stumbling across the Ukrainian steppe. There’s mention of 30 soldiers dying of starvation; somehow, I find that less probable. Later, they reach a city called Rehgin in Rumania, some 280 km to the south of the camp by the Dniester as the bird flies. Sajer says it was called “Arlau, or Erlau” back then; Erlau was the German name for the city of Eger in Hungary, some 300 km further west. Sajer doesn’t mention how they came to be rejoined with the rest of GD, which was resting 200 km east by south-east.

All told, the chapter, which is another powerful description of the depravations of war, doesn’t make much sense, unless one takes into account his poor sense of dates, places and other essentials. His woozy recollections of anything but personal details and emotions, makes it impossible to corroborate his claims as to his whereabouts during large period of time. Large parts of his trek must have been in terrain behind enemy lines. This chapter made me seriously doubt the veracity of his account; he might have experienced some of it, but all of it…?

Chapter 16

Again, Sajer isn’t with the main body of GD. The Division is fighting in Lithuania, but he writes that he rejoins his regiment somewhere near Danzig (according to hints in the text). He refers to Volkssturm units, but as those were raised in late October 1944, it doesn’t fit with his descriptions of the Soviet advances to the Baltic coast. On page 484, it appears like his unit ends up south of the Soviet thrust to the coast, which was reached on 9 October, and thus not in the Memel bridgehead.


Chapter 17

On page 497, it is apparent that Sajer must have confused things in the previous chapter, as his position is now north of a Soviet thrust to the coast, and that Memel is the closest option. The date is probably around 10 October. He mentions that English and Canadian prisoners are caught up in the chaos of Memel; it could be possible that they came from Stalag Luft 6 at Heydekrug (Silute in Lithuania), but the PoWs were evacuated to Stalag Luft 4 in the summer of 1944. There was another PoW camp farther south (Oflag 53) that was active longer, but it isn’t clear which nationalities were held there.

Sajer mentions receiving a new firearm, “the new P.M. which the Volkssturm had recently distributed – an extremely effective weapon which combined features of both the F.M and the old P.M.” It is obvious that the translator hasn’t figured out a couple of pretty easy abbreviations, ”F.M.” = ”fusil mitrailleur” (machinegun or automatic rifle), and ”P.M.” = ”pistolet mitrailleur” (submachine gun). Sajer has confused the cheap automatic weapon used in limited numbers by the Volkssturm, the Volksgewehr VG 1-5, with the MP44 assault rifle. Besides, the VG 1-5 wasn’t produced until January 1945 in Thuringia, and it is doubtful that it could’ve reached Memel before the Germans evacuated the city.

“Großdeutschland” was evacuated from the Memel bridgehead, beginning on 26 November. The last GD units left on 4 December, reaching Königsberg by boat. Sajer sees the heavy cruiser “Prinz Eugen” provide naval bombardment of Soviet units, but he must be mistaken; “Prinz Eugen” was in Gotenhafen for maintenance during December, and didn’t see action again until 29-31 January, when she was deployed north of Königsberg. By this time, Sajer had left Memel (probably in early December), so he must’ve seen another warship.


Chapter 18

In this chapter, Sajer’s account makes more sense. He spends about three weeks in Pillau, referring to the “January cold”. He mentions a “metal cross” on a slight rise outside the town; there was really a stone cross raised in 1830 to commemorate the martyrdom of Saint Adalbert, and which was later destroyed by the Soviets. Later, he manages to make it to Danzig, where he hears rumours about the sinking of a refugee ship, the “Wilhelm Gustloff” (sunk on 30 January).

While Sajer is in Pillau, Danzig and Gotenhafen, PzGr-Reg GD and PzFüs-Reg GD fought south of Königsberg. The remnants of the regiments were evacuated on 29 March from Balga to Pillau and continued combat. Sajer describes the Soviet attacks on Gotenhafen, which dates the text to the last week of March. Gotenhafen fell to the Soviets on 28 March.


Chaper 19

Sajer and the others arrive to Hela. He learns that it is Sunday the 28th or 29th of March (the last Sunday of March 1945 was the 25th). On 1 April, he boards the hospital ship ”Pretoria” and sails for Denmark, escorted by a battleship. There was really a “Pretoria” that sailed for Denmark on that day, and which was escorted by a battleship, probably “Lützow”.

As an aside, it is worth noting that Sajer mentions that his German is now much better than his French, which is in line with an earlier comment on page 214. Some people have commented that Sajer’s German remained poor during his Wehrmacht service, but that isn’t true.


Epilogue

Sajer mentions that after the war, he served in the French Army. There is evidence that he served for 10 months in the French Navy.

The End


The final chapters are the most accurate in the book, and have a ring of truth to them. It is entirely possible that Guy Sajer experienced the horrors of Memel and Gotenhafen. If he had been faking his story, he would’ve provided more accurate facts in the earlier chapters, instead of saving them for the later chapters. It is my impression that “The Forgotten Soldier” is an autobiographical novel in many places, with room for a fiction-like narrative, while it reads like a memoir in the final chapters, with verifiable observations and greater accuracy. “The Forgotten Soldier” should be read for what it is: a personal account where the details are often wrong, or at least not adding up, but where the passion and experienced hardships are (mostly) real. It isn’t an account of Großdeutschland’s battles, but then Sajer never claimed that it was.